JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
deep Gulf grows
wider. Saudi Arabia and its
allies break diplomatic
ties with Iran as the crisis
between longtime
rivals intensifies.
Also ahead: It's 2016, and the
race for the
White House is heating up. Bill
Clinton hits
the trail for Hillary, while
Donald Trump
releases his first TV ad.
Then, on the home front: why
injured veterans
who want children can't get help
with in vitro
fertilization treatments.
CPL. JASON HALLETT (RET.), U.S.
Marine Corps:
It's very angering and it brings
a lot of
resentment towards my active
service and stuff.
I don't regret joining the
Marine Corps. But
the simple fact is that they
told us that
we'd be taken care of us if we
got injured.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Persian Gulf
powers Saudi Arabia
and Iran stared each other down
today in a
full-scale diplomatic
confrontation. The struggle
pitted Sunnis against Shiites,
Persians against
Arabs, and had other nations
choosing sides.
Anti-Saudi protests brought
thousands of Shiite
Iraqis into the streets of
Baghdad today outside
the heavily fortified Green Zone
that's home
to the U.S. Embassy. But the
Saudis were undeterred,
as Foreign Minister Adel
Al-Jubeir made clear
in an interview with Reuters.
ADEL AL-JUBEIR, Saudi Arabian
Foreign Minister:
We decided to cut off all
diplomatic relations
with Iran. We will also be
cutting off all
air traffic to and from Iran. We
will be cutting
off all commercial relations
with Iran and
we will have a travel ban
against people traveling
to Iran.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, Saudi
allies followed
suit. Sunni-dominated
governments in Bahrain
and Sudan announced they, too,
are cutting
diplomatic ties with Iran. And
the United
Arab Emirates said it's
recalling its ambassador
from Tehran.
All of this was sparked by Saudi
Arabia's
execution of Sheik Nimr al-Nimr,
a prominent
Shiite cleric, on Saturday. He'd
been a major
critic of the Saudi government
and a central
figure of protests in 2012
before he was arrested.
His execution touched off
widespread protests
in largely Shiite Iran, and
Supreme Leader
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei condemned
the Saudis.
AYATOLLAH ALI KHAMENEI, Supreme
Leader of
Iran (through translator):
Killing a knowledgeable
man, who promoted virtue and
prevented vice,
and had religious zeal, is
certainly a crime,
a great crime. It is also a
mistake, because
the spilled blood will
undoubtedly bring divine
retribution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Manmade
retribution came quickly.
Crowds ransacked Saudi Arabia's
embassy in
Tehran and set it ablaze early
yesterday.
That triggered the Saudis'
decision to end
diplomatic relations
Iran is getting support from
Shiite protesters
in large numbers across the
region, including
in Bahrain, Pakistan and
Lebanon. And two
Sunni mosques were destroyed in
Iraq.
The spike in tensions has the
U.S., the U.N.
and others urging both sides to
step back.
But the White House also bluntly
criticized
the Saudis today.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
There have been direct concerns
raised by
U.S. officials to Saudi
officials about the
potential damaging consequences
of following
through on mass executions, in
particular
the execution of al-Nimr.
And, unfortunately, this is a
concern that
we raised with the Saudis in
advance, and,
unfortunately, the concerns that
we expressed
to the Saudis have precipitated
the kinds
of consequences that we were
concerned about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's still
unclear what the
consequences will be for ongoing
Saudi Iranian
proxy wars. In Yemen, Saudi
Arabia has led
an air campaign against Shiite
militants backed
by Iran. And, in Syria, the
Saudis and other
Gulf Arab states are backing
rebel groups
against President Bashar Assad,
a longtime
ally of Iran.
Late tonight, in Tehran, the
government of
Iran voiced regret over the
attacks on Saudi
missions and vowed to arrest
those responsible.
We will delve more deeply into
their confrontation
after the news summary.
Wall Street started the year in
a rout over
the Persian Gulf tensions and a
7 percent
sell-off in China. At the end of
the day,
the Dow Jones industrial average
lost 276
points to close below 17150. It
had been down
450. The Nasdaq fell 104 points,
and the S&P
500 slipped 31.
The U.S. government is taking
Volkswagen to
court over emissions-cheating
software used
in diesel vehicles. A civil
lawsuit filed
in Detroit charges the cheating
led to greenhouse
gas emissions far beyond federal
standards.
Some 600,000 Volkswagen-made
vehicles are
affected in the U.S.
President Obama today defended
his plans to
tighten gun control restrictions
without congressional
approval. He said his executive
action would
fall within both his legal
authority and the
right to bear arms enshrined in
the Second
Amendment. The president spoke
in the Oval
Office, after a meeting with his
Attorney
General Loretta Lynch and FBI
Director James
Comey.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Although we have to be very
clear that this
is not going to solve every
violent crime
in this country, it's not going
to prevent
every mass shooting, it's not
going to keep
every gun out of the hands of a
criminal,
it will potentially save lives
in this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Obama will
make the announcement
tomorrow. He's expected to
broaden background
checks on gun sales.
An armed anti-government group
stood their
ground today at a wildlife
refuge in Oregon.
They seized the place over the
weekend to
protest what they see as federal
overreach
on public lands. The FBI said
it's seeking
-- quote -- "a peaceful
resolution to the
standoff." We will explore the
story in full
later in the program.
The flood tide along the
Mississippi River
is moving on, putting towns in
southernmost
Illinois at risk. The water has
largely receded
in the Saint Louis region,
revealing widespread
damage and leaving a series of
towns to clean
up. Meanwhile, near record
crests are expected
along the Illinois River this
week.
And starting tomorrow, local
governments across
New York state will have to move
the homeless
off the streets and out of the
cold, by force,
if necessary. Governor Andrew
Cuomo signed
an order yesterday to transport
people to
shelters when temperatures dip
below freezing.
Today, in New York City, he said
he will defend
the policy against any legal
challenges.
GOV. ANDREW CUOMO (D), New York:
And they
say, well, why are we doing this
or why should
we do this? I said because it's
not right
to leave brothers and sisters on
the street
corner. It's not right to leave
children on
the street corner.
(APPLAUSE)
GOV. ANDREW CUOMO: It's not
right to have
shelter system that is so dirty
and unsafe
that people have to stay on the
street corner.
That's the only reason. It's not
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The mayor of New
York City,
Bill de Blasio, said he supports
Cuomo's intent,
but he argued it would take a
state law to
do what the governor wants.
In India, the military spent a
third day clearing
an air force base near the
Pakistani border.
Pro-Pakistani gunmen stormed the
compound
in Punjab state on Saturday
morning, killing
seven Indian soldiers. Search
operations resumed
around the base today as
security remained
tight. So far, five militants
have been killed
with at least one other still on
the loose.
The incident could endanger a
recent thaw
in India's relations with
Pakistan.
An Indian consulate in Northern
Afghanistan
was attacked overnight, and it
took all day
to end the siege. Soldiers fired
rockets and
artillery at insurgents who
holed up in a
nearby building after they
failed to break
into the consulate in
Mazar-e-Sharif. No group
claimed responsibility, but the
Taliban has
carried out similar attacks
before.
And authorities in Southern
Mexico are investigating
the murder of a mayor,
apparently by drug
gangs. Gisela Mota was killed on
Saturday,
just one day after taking
office. The regional
governor says the gangs mean to
stop officials
from calling in the state
police. Mourners
gathered yesterday to pay their
respects,
and some complained the
government had failed
to protect Mayor Mota. She was
33 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what the
Iran-Saudi conflict means for
diplomacy in
the Middle East; on the 2016
campaign trail
with new tactics and new ads;
why armed protesters
say they took over a national
wildlife refuge;
much more.
say they took over a national
wildlife refuge;
much more.
Now we return to the tensions
between Saudi
Arabia and Iran.
I'm joined by Vali Nasr, dean of
the Johns
Hopkins School of Advanced
International Studies,
and Randa Slim of the Middle
East institute.
And we welcome you both.
Randa Slim, to you first, why
did the Saudis
execute this cleric whom they
had imprisoned
already for several years?
RANDA SLIM, Middle East
Institute: This is
a crisis that needs to be looked
at through
the context of an ongoing
rivalry for power
between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
And this execution is a message
from the Saudis
to Iran, but also it's a message
to its own
domestic constituency. But I
think the crisis
that has been caused by this
execution is
primarily driven by domestic
factors.
We have two regimes in this case
in Saudi
Arabia and Iran that are acting
out of fear
and out of feelings of
insecurity about the
long-term stability of the
regime. And they
are using this crisis as a way
to consolidate
power and support internally and
to send messages
also regionally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Vali Nasr,
the Saudis had
to know that this would inflame
and anger
Iran.
VALI NASR, School of Advanced
International
Studies, Johns Hopkins
University: Yes, they
did.
And this came after another
crisis which followed
the death of several hundred
Iranian pilgrims
during a tragedy in Mecca last
year. The relations
got very tense. Both sides
accused one another
of bad intentions. And Iran had
also warned
about the killing of this
cleric, and so had
the United States.
And the killing of a cleric,
particularly
Shia Islam, is not a trivial
matter. And the
Saudis knew that this -- killing
a Shia cleric
is not like killing any other
Shia activist.
And I think Randa is absolutely
correct that
there was a domestic factor.
This execution
case came a few days after the
Saudis announced
their first austerity package
internally as
a consequence of reduction of
oil prices.
It also came regionally right
after the United
States first included Iran in
the Vienna process.
And then the Shia government in
Iraq, with
American and Iranian support,
recaptured Ramadi.
It looked like the Iranians were
actually
on much of an upswing in the
region than the
Saudis were. So, it's also a
signal. In addition
to the domestic policy, it's a
signal to the
United States as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Randa Slim, fair
to say there
is more animosity on the part of
the Saudis
toward Iran than the other way
around?
RANDA SLIM: I think, look, the
Iranian threat
has all been prioritized by the
Saudi political
establishment.
And anti-Iran feelings,
anti-Shia feelings
are also prevalent among large
segments of
the Saudi population. But I hate
to disagree
with my friend Vali, but there
is also -- on
the Iranian side, there are
certain hard-liners
inside the Iranian regime that
have approved
of the attacks against the Saudi
Embassy and
the Saudi Consulate.
And these are the members of the
Iranian regime
that are feeling very, how to
say, concerned,
scared about the consequences of
the Iran
deal, about Iran opening to the
outside world,
and how this is going to affect
their own
hold on political and economic
power. And
they are using this crisis as a
way to ramp
up support and consolidate their
camp ahead
of the upcoming elections in
Iran in February.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Vali, some
elements in
Iran using this to bolster their
own case
against normalizing or even
coming close to
normalizing relations with the
U.S.?
VALI NASR: No, actually, I agree
with Randa.
There is a faction in Iran which
is not happy
with the nuclear deal, is not
happy with a
change of Iran's status in the
global affairs,
and also wants to defeat
President Rouhani
and his moderates in the
upcoming elections.
And I think the Saudi action is
much like
when Republicans in Congress
posture with
new sanctions against Iran. The
conservatives
immediately take advantage of it
in order
to muddy the water, embarrass
the president
and try to prove that opening to
the West
has actually been a mistake and
that Iran
would do a lot better by taking
a hard-line
position.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Having all said
this, Randa
Slim, what are the consequences?
We know there
is the war in Syria. There is
the nuclear
deal between the Iran and the
U.S. What happens
to that nuclear deal going
forward?
RANDA SLIM: Look, this is
happening at a time
when tensions, especially
sectarian tensions
in the region, as they are, are
already at
a high pitch. So it's like
pouring gasoline
on a fire.
And the fallout, for example, in
terms of
the implications for the
negotiations in Syria
or the U.N.-sponsored
negotiations that were
to be launched at the end of the
month in
Syria, as well as the U.N.
attempts to establish
a permanent defense in Yemen, I
think we can
say that these efforts have now
been dealt
a very severe blow.
They're on life support. And I
don't know
whether the upcoming
negotiations in Syria
will take place now. Neither
Saudi Arabia
nor Iran are incentivized to
make concessions,
to pressure their Syrian proxies
to make concessions.
But then there is also broader
regional fallout.
I'm very concerned about whether
Bahrain will
follow Saudi Arabia too and ramp
up its security
approach in dealing with its own
Shia opposition,
the fallout with the security in
Lebanon,
where, if Iran or Saudi Arabia
tries to pressure
their respective proxies in
Lebanon to take
sides, how this will impact
already high regional
sectarian tension.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Vali Nasr,
how do you
see the repercussions going
forward?
VALI NASR: Well, I agree with
everything that
Randa said, but also it's
important to know
that the United States and its
international
allies have their own interests
in the region,
which is fighting ISIS, ending
the war in
Syria, making the Iranian
nuclear deal successful.
It's very clear that the
hard-liners in Iran
and the Saudi regime have a
different agenda
here. And sectarianism serves
that agenda.
Saudi Arabia didn't want Iran to
be included
in the regional processes. It
doesn't want
Iran to normalize relations with
the West.
From the very early on, it
rejected the nuclear
deal and it tied the nuclear
deal to regional
issues.
And, also, Saudi Arabia is much
more interested
in saying the problem in the
Middle East is
Iran, not ISIS, whereas, for the
West, it's
now ISIS.
Going forward, in 2016, if the
United States
wants to get ahead of the ISIS
issue, if it
wants to find a way to end the
war in Syria,
which, I agree with Randa, it's
now very difficult
to see how the Vienna process
will get us
there -- it has to essentially
be very clear
about what it expects of both
sides in terms
of cooperation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Serious
repercussions everywhere
you look.
Vali Nasr, Randa Slim, we thank
you both.
We have talked about it for
months. Now we
are here, 2016.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins explains
how the presidential race has
quickly hit
another gear.
LISA DESJARDINS: Just try and
take it all
in. The many candidates are
scrambling, as
months of buildup are over, and
the actual
2016 is here. It means a
mounting frenzy of
rallies and big-time surrogates.
But today's biggest move came
over the airwaves.
NARRATOR: The politicians can
pretend it's
something else.
LISA DESJARDINS: A provocative
new Donald
Trump ad stressing security.
NARRATOR: That's why he's
calling for a temporary
shutdown of Muslims entering the
United States,
until we can figure out what's
going on.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's Trump's
first TV ad
of the campaign, and it's
raising the intensity
of the race. At the same time,
his rivals
are revving up their opposition
to him.
In New Hampshire today, New
Jersey Governor
Chris Christie called Trump's
security promise
an empty one.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate:
These are the most dangerous and
perilous
times in our country's recent
history. Showtime
is over, everybody. We are not
electing an
entertainer in chief.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile, on
the Democratic
side, something new from the
Clinton campaign:
the first solo appearances from
former President
Bill Clinton this cycle. He
stuck mostly to
his wife's biography.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United
States: I do not believe, in my
lifetime,
anybody has run for this job at
a moment of
great importance who was better
qualified,
by knowledge, experience and
temperament to
do what needs to be done now.
LISA DESJARDINS: He stayed
positive and ignored
recent attacks from Donald Trump
about his
infidelity. The candidate
herself, Hillary
Clinton, in Iowa, did attack
Trump and Republicans.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
... negatively to what I hear
coming from
the other side is because not
only are -- what
they are saying about Muslims,
wrong and shameful,
it's dangerous.
LISA DESJARDINS: Her main rival,
Vermont Senator
Bernie Sanders, was in New
Hampshire. Sanders'
message? That his grassroots
campaign has
a real shot at wresting the
nomination away
from Clinton.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
We can win in Iowa, and we can
win in New
Hampshire. We have a real path
toward victory.
LISA DESJARDINS: And that's just
a taste of
the blitz across the early
states.
Republican Senator Ted Cruz in
Iowa.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Enough is enough and we are
going to take
our country back.
LISA DESJARDINS: And Florida
Senator Marco
Rubio in New Hampshire.
As for rival Republican Ben
Carson, his move
was online. Carson released a
new tax plan
calling for a flat tax of 14.9
percent on
most Americans. But the numbers
that may matter
most on the trail are dates.
The Iowa caucuses on February 1,
and the New
Hampshire primary eight days
later.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now that it's
2016, it's the
perfect time for Politics Monday
with Tamara
Keith and Amy Walter. Both are
in New Hampshire,
and I spoke with them a short
time ago.
Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report, 2016 is
finally here.
You're both in New Hampshire.
Tamara, let me start with you.
And you were
with Bill Clinton when he spoke
today earlier
in New Hampshire. It was thought
he might
respond to some of what Donald
Trump has been
talking about lately, but he
didn't.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: He certainly
didn't. He was there to be the
supportive
spouse mostly.
He started out talking about
news articles
that he's read and maybe made
some veiled
references to some of Donald
Trump's language
on Muslims. But he didn't go
there on some
of the other things Donald Trump
has been
going after him on.
And then he really sang the
praises of his
wife and told a series of
anecdotes about
her going back to when they
first met in law
school. And many of the people
in the audience
there I talked to afterwards
said that they
learned new things about Hillary
Clinton.
So, he was doing the proud
husband thing,
and not really hitting hard
against other
candidates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, the
Hillary Clinton
campaign views him purely as an
asset?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: I think
so.
And I think, listen, he brings
right now in
a Democratic primary a very good
track record.
Democratic voters like him. They
respond to
him, and I think we will see him
on the trail
much more in the coming months.
Again, you
can't have Hillary Clinton
everywhere. She
has somebody who knows what it's
like to run
a presidential campaign going
out into all
of these early primary state.
Another thing, it's just -- it's
such a striking
contrast between what Hillary
Clinton can
do with her husband former
president, and
what Jeb Bush can't do with his
brother former
president. Bringing him on the
road, there
has been a lot of talk about
that early on,
but we haven't seen it quite
yet, and the
last name, of course, of Bush
more problematic
for Jeb in a Republican primary.
The Clinton
name still gold in a Democratic
primary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of course, the
reason Bill
Clinton is there, Tamara, is the
fact that
Bernie Sanders happens to be
running a little
bit ahead in the polls. How
worried are they
about Bernie Sanders? How strong
a race is
he putting out there?
TAMARA KEITH: He, as you say, is
leading in
the polls here, has a strong
organization
here, both in New Hampshire and
in Iowa.
He's working hard in Iowa to
build his organization
there, because the Clintons can
sort of write
off New Hampshire. And they keep
putting out
these lines like, well, you
know, he is from
a neighboring state, and people
don't tend
to lose in their neighboring
state of New
Hampshire.
So they are definitely setting
expectations,
though it's unclear whether they
actually
think that he could win in New
Hampshire or
whether they're just trying to
lower the bar.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Amy, the
other thing we're
watching today, as we mentioned,
is Donald
Trump out with his first
television ad. The
word fear is being associated
with it. The
Trump campaign has waited until
now to put
this out. What's the strategy
here?
AMY WALTER: Judy, I always have
a hard time
understanding the strategy of
the Trump campaign.
So, I don't know if it's
strategy, as much
as the fact that he is doubling
down on what
has gotten him so far thus far,
which is this
idea that he is the strongest
and the toughest
and the most resolute in the
field.
And I think the more that we
hear about trouble
in the Mideast, the more now
that we're hearing
about problems coming from all
sectors when
it relates to ISIS, et cetera,
this just makes
Donald Trump look even better in
the eyes
of many Republican primary
voters, who are
frustrated, anxious, ready to
turn the page.
And this ad just reminds them of
what they
like in him in the first place.
Of course,
it also reminds a lot of
moderate voters,
independent-leaning voters about
what they
don't like about Donald Trump.
And I think
this is always going to be the
trouble for
Trump, is what works very well
in a Republican
primary cuts against him among
the general
electorate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is, I think,
the understanding
of a lot of people that, when
you talk about
terrorism, Democrats feel that
that's not
their strongest issue, that
Republicans are
just naturally going to be in a
better place
on that.
TAMARA KEITH: Though Hillary
Clinton would
say that she is strong on those
issues, as
a former secretary of state. I
think that's
the case that she would
certainly make.
To me, what was striking with
the Donald Trump
ad is the imagery of
undocumented immigrants,
presumably, grainy footage
running across
the border. I think that's what
it's supposed
to be. It takes me back to the
1990s in California.
And Governor Pete Wilson's
reelection campaign
had an ad with similar footage
of people flooding
over the borders.
And that ad and some other
things that he
ran on in that campaign
ultimately hurt the
Republican Party in California
in a way that
some Republicans are concerned
could hurt
the national party, with this
Trump ad and
the language about immigrants,
because the
demographics are changing in
this country.
And appealing to Latino voters
and Asian voters
is going to be critical, many
believe, for
the future of the Republican
Party in this
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, the other
candidate I
want to ask you about is Chris
Christie. You
are going to be seeing him at an
event later
today.
He has three events in New
Hampshire today.
What's going on with Chris
Christie in the
Granite State?
AMY WALTER: It's going to be
very interesting
to see what Chris Christie does
and whether
he's able to coalesce what has
at this point
been a very fractured primary up
here in New
Hampshire, Donald Trump leading
the pack with
about 25 percent of the vote,
and then the
rest of it is really splintered
about.
And Chris Christie wants to be
the establishment
candidate. Right now, he's
competing for that
lane, for that anti-Trump lane,
with Jeb Bush,
Marco Rubio, John Kasich. He had
a speech
today right here at Saint Anselm
College,
where he made the case that, you
know what?
I understand you're angry,
America. I get
it. I'm with you on that. But
you need somebody
who's actually been tested. I,
he said, have
been tested at the executive
level. The others
haven't. Anybody can do
showmanship. It takes
somebody else to have real
executive experience.
I think we are going to hear a
lot more about
that in the days and weeks to
come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the pace
has quickened.
It is 2016.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're looking at
those days
on the calendar.
You're both in New Hampshire. We
thank you,
Amy Walter, Tamara Keith.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
refugee crisis
threatens Europe's open borders;
why injured
veterans can't get help for in
vitro fertilization;
and the winner of the Man Booker
Prize explores
a dangerous time in Jamaica's
history.
But, first, the latest in a
three-day standoff
in Oregon pitting a small band
of self- styled
militiamen against the U.S.
government and
its land management policies.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Malheur
Wildlife Refuge
sits in the snowy high desert of
Southeastern
Oregon, with just a few small
buildings for
park staff and visitors. It's
now occupied
by Ammon Bundy and other armed
protesters
who are against federal control
of Western
ranch lands and the treatment of
two Oregon
ranchers, Dwight and Steven
Hammond.
AMMON BUNDY, Armed Protester:
They want to
pass on the ranching heritage to
their children
and to their grandchildren. And
because of
that refusal to sell their
ranch, these federal
agencies began an attack on this
family.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Hammonds
were due to
report for additional jail time
in California
today for a 2012 conviction of
committing
arson on public lands.
But the Hammonds have distanced
themselves
from Ammon Bundy, who, along
with his father,
Cliven Bundy, staged an armed
protest back
in 2014 in Nevada against
federal land management
officials.
Last week, Bundy issued an
emotional call
to help the Hammonds in Oregon.
AMMON BUNDY: I feel that this is
every bit
and maybe in many ways more
important than
the Bundy ranch. I feel and know
that the
abuses that this family has
endured is much
greater than even the Bundy
family, and this
is something that cannot be
ignored.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On Saturday, a
crowd did
protest the Hammonds' five-year
jail sentence.
They marched peacefully in
Burns, Oregon,
which is just 30 miles from the
Malheur Wildlife
Refuge.
Malheur's 187,000 acres are home
to more than
320 bird species. It was created
in 1908 by
President Theodore Roosevelt
from what were
then called -- quote --
"unclaimed government
lands." Now members of the
self-described
militia, the newly named
Citizens for Constitutional
Freedom, want the land returned.
LaVoy Finicum is an Arizona
rancher in the
group.
LAVOY FINICUM, Citizens for
Constitutional
Freedom: Now here we are,
control without
representation, one-third of our
land mass.
It's an empire within our own
country, unaccountable,
unelected. The real power is in
the bureaucracy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So far, law
enforcement
hasn't taken any action at the
refuge, but
the FBI is monitoring the
situation.
For more on this story, I'm now
joined on
the phone by Amanda Peacher of
Oregon Public
Broadcasting.
So, Amanda, I understand you
were in the compound
yesterday, and you have been
outside this
compound all day today. Can you
just tell
us a little bit about what is
the scene like
there?
AMANDA PEACHER, Oregon Public
Broadcasting:
Absolutely.
So, it's a cold winter day and
this compound
is situated in just kind of a
sea of sagebrush
and range land, really. It's
very isolated.
There are 15, I would estimate,
buildings
within the complex. And it's
very quiet here.
You see a few of the protesters
walking between
buildings. There are some women
in the kitchen
making grilled cheese sandwiches
for the protesters.
But it's very calm. It's very
quiet. There
was a press conference earlier
today in which
the protesters spoke a little
bit more about
why they're here, but, at the
scene, it's
quite calm.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean,
obviously, we can't
call this a standoff, because
there is no
one standing in opposition to
these guys.
Is it really true that there is
no sign of
law enforcement there?
AMANDA PEACHER: I have seen zero
law enforcement
vehicles and -- that are marked
at least.
And I have heard nothing from
law enforcement
about their intentions to come
near the area.
I will say that the protesters
here are very
peaceful, and law enforcement
has indicated
that they would like it to
remain peaceful
here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, Ammon
Bundy and
his supporters say that they are
there supporting
the Hammonds, who reported to
prison in Southern
California today, although the
Hammonds have
distanced themselves a bit from
that.
What is that the Bundys and his
supporters,
what do they want?
AMANDA PEACHER: Well, what they
would say
is that they would like to see
federal lands
like this refuge turned over to
local control.
They said that they would like
to start working
the land here. And although it's
not exactly
clear what that means at this
point, I think
many of them feel that the way
that federal
lands are managed is not
appropriate and,
in some cases, unconstitutional.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What sense
have you gotten
of what the locals' reaction to
all of this
has been?
AMANDA PEACHER: It's been mixed.
I think that there has been a
lot of fear
about what this could look like
from the local
community, in part because you
hear the words
occupation and protest, and
people assume
that there could be some
violence here.
But I did see some local
residents come by
and take a tour. They were
welcomed into the
complex. And they thought that
they were very
welcomed by the protesters and
not threatened
at all. And they were --
appreciated seeing
what was actually happening on
the ground.
That said, I know that many in
Harney County
are uncomfortable with having
this protest
here in this area and are wary
of what it
could become.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Amanda Peacher,
Oregon Public Broadcasting,
thank you very
much.
AMANDA PEACHER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And moments ago,
the Hammonds
officially turned themselves in
to serve that
additional jail time.
Now to the refugee crisis in
Europe, where
two more countries have
tightened their borders.
Denmark announced today that it
is instituting
I.D. checks on its frontier with
Germany,
this after Sweden enacted a
strict new border
policy.
The moves further erode the
20-year old Schengen
agreement, which is supposed to
guarantee
free movement of people and
goods across most
of mainland Europe.
From the Danish capital,
Copenhagen, special
correspondent Malcolm Brabant
reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Midnight at
Copenhagen airport
station, the last stop before
Sweden, and
security guards began to check
the identities
of those traveling across the
bridge linking
the two countries.
Sweden insisted on new controls,
warning transport
companies they risked heavy
fines if undocumented
travelers were allowed through.
Passengers
dismount from Sweden-bound
trains to have
their papers scanned. There is a
long fence
between the tracks to stop
people from trying
to escape the checks.
ANDREAS, Swedish Tourist: I
trust my government.
We have taken a huge
responsibility within
Europe and with the refugees, so
that we cannot
take any more.
ALEX FUNKE, Swedish Tourist:
It's a huge backward
step, because Sweden is a free
country and
everyone should come. And even
if they need
help, they should be getting it
here or where
they can.
MAN: It's just as if you were
living in a
foreign country now. Yes, no
free movement.
It really two steps backwards.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Precisely 12
hours later,
Denmark's prime minister Lars
Lokke Rasmussen,
responded by announcing controls
along the
border with Germany. The Danish
measures will
initially be in place for 10
days, but the
government warned the procedures
could be
extended.
Malcolm Brabant from the "PBS
NewsHour," Prime
Minister.
Do you think that you are going
to contribute
to a crisis further down the
line in other
countries in the rest of Europe
and perhaps
beyond?
LARS LOKKE RASMUSSEN, Danish
Prime Minister:
I think it's pretty obvious that
we are in
a situation, if the European
Union can't protect
the external borders, you will
see more and
more countries which will be
forced into introducing
temporary internal border
control.
This is something we need to
take very seriously,
because it will have a negative
impact on
prosperity. I'm a true believer
of the freedom
of movement. This is not a happy
moment at
all. We have invested billions
in infrastructure
between Sweden and Denmark. We
have invested
millions in international
branding of the
greater Copenhagen region. So,
this is a step
backwards.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Trine
Christensen, a senior
official at the human rights
group Amnesty
International, is concerned that
other nations
along the refugee trail back to
Greece will
now follow suit at a time when
migrants who
aren't from Syria, Iraq and
Afghanistan are
stranded.
TRINE CHRISTENSEN, Amnesty
International:
What we're seeing today is that
Sweden is
desperately trying to get the
rest of Europe
to actually face up to its
responsibilities.
If there is a European response
to this crisis,
there can be a solution. There
can be at least
a way of distributing the
burdens and to help
people who are in desperate need
of protection.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Christensen is
particularly
worried about the long-term
impact on Turkey,
Lebanon and Jordan, which have
taken in many
more refugees than the one
million or so who
have entered Europe in the past
year.
TRINE CHRISTENSEN: If we
continue to see what
is happening today, and that is
the majority
of countries trying to shirk
that responsibility,
trying to avoid helping, then we
will see
a buildup of more and more
problems and more
and more refugees. And the
pressure on the
local areas, on the neighboring
countries,
which they are not able to bear
in any way,
shape or form. As that happens,
and those
countries start to implode,
that's when we
will see a refugee problem that
will make
what we have today look like
nothing at all.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But the most
pressing concern
for Michael Randropp is an
economic one. He
represents 15,000 people who
live and work
in the cross-border region and
commute between
Denmark and Sweden. Their lives
have suddenly
become more complex and
disruptive.
MICHAEL RANDROPP, Government
Official: Some
of the passengers say that this
is a new Iron
Curtain. And other passengers
say that this
is a new Berlin Wall.
MALCOLM BRABANT: For the past 20
years, businessman
Ture Ertmann has lived in
Sweden, where homes
and cars are cheaper, and worked
in Copenhagen.
But he's now contemplating
moving to Denmark.
MAN: Gentlemen, next stop, first
stop in Sweden.
In Sweden, we have border
control, so please
have your passports or other
identification
cards ready.
TURE ERTMANN, Businessman: The
whole idea
of the Schengen is that we have
external border
controls. And now, suddenly,
that seems to
be breaking down. And each
country is raising
the inner borders. So, suddenly,
the whole
European community, the whole
cooperation
across borders seems to be
challenged a lot.
So, that's -- I think that's
worrisome.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The impact of
the changes
is also being felt north of
Copenhagen on
the main ferry route lining
Denmark and Sweden,
which is in competition with the
bridge. The
ferry company fears the cost of
implementing
the new measures will cost at
least $3 million
a year.
Chief executive Henrik Rorbaek
has complained
to the European Union about
Sweden's action
and wants Stockholm to pay
compensation.
HENRIK RORBAEK, Chief Executive:
It means
like, for example, if you're in
New York,
wants to pass the Brooklyn
Bridge, then you
have to show an I.D. I'm quite
sure that every
American would consider that as
a mess.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's another
nail in Schengen's
coffin.
LARS LOKKE RASMUSSEN: Hopefully
not. What
we need now is European leaders
who should
respond to this. We have been
pushing and
pushing for a European solution.
So, this
is a clear signal that your
Europe now needs
to take decisions which can
protect the external
borders.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Denmark's
actions have been
greeted with disappointment in
Germany, which,
along with Sweden, has welcomed
most refugees
during this crisis.
The German Foreign Ministry
spokesman described
freedom of movement as the
European Union's
greatest achievement, but he
warned that the
Schengen area was in danger. He
said it was
crucial that common solutions
were found to
the migrant flow.
But throughout this crisis,
national interest
has taken priority over European
unity. Today's
developments reinforce that
trend.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Copenhagen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For thousands of
young veterans
in America, putting the wars in
Afghanistan
and Iraq behind them remains a
constant challenge.
For some, starting a family is
an important
part of the healing process.
But, as the "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham
reports, even that can be a
struggle.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All newlyweds
face challenges,
but Jason and Rachel Hallett
have more challenges
than most. Jason is a triple
amputee. Back
in 2010, at age 19, this young
Marine lost
two legs and an arm when he
stepped on an
IED while on patrol in
Afghanistan.
CPL. JASON HALLETT (RET.), U.S.
Marine Corps:
When 9/11 and everything
happened, I was -- I
had a little bit of interest to
join the military.
But, as soon as that happened,
it just became
-- everything was circling
around me joining
the military.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After his
injury, barely
clinging to life, and riddled
with infections,
Jason was cared for at U.S.
military facilities
in Germany, Maryland and
California.
He hadn't been in touch with
Rachel since
they dated back in eighth grade.
But, in the
hospital, he found her again on
Facebook.
RACHEL HALLETT, Wife of Jason
Hallett: He
sends me this friend request a
couple years
after I had kind of given up.
And when I saw
what had happened, I just
started crying.
He hadn't posted, like, what
happened. But
he had, like -- his picture
obviously was
different than last time I
remembered him,
and said that he worked for the
Marine Corps,
so I kind of put two pieces
together.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Facebook led
to phone calls,
which led to a visit, and then a
wedding day.
They now live in Windsor,
Colorado. Jason's
studying to be a certified
financial planner.
Rachel baby-sits to make extra
money, but
her full-time job now really is
caring for
Jason, and she gets a small
stipend from the
VA for that work.
What the Halletts want most is
to start a
family. But there's a problem.
RACHEL HALLETT: We had just kind
of been told
that it would probably be a
problem because
of some of his injuries and
where his shrapnel
is. There's tons of shrapnel
everywhere throughout
his body.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Still in your
body today?
CPL. JASON HALLETT: Yes. So,
basically, one
of the pieces had actually
connected itself
to one of my testicles. And so I
now have
to take testosterone injections
basically
to get me back to normal. And
with that, one
of the side effects is, it
basically kills
the sperm off.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In order to
conceive a child,
the Halletts have to go through
lengthy in
vitro fertilization treatments.
In vitro is
an expensive process. It
typically costs about
$12,000 to $13,000 per try, and
the first
try often doesn't work, nor does
the second.
So the bills can stack up. But,
unlike all
the other medical treatment
related to Jason's
injuries, the VA doesn't cover
IVF treatment
for wounded vets, and so the
young couple
are paying for this themselves.
Congress passed a law in 1992
that led to
the Veterans Administration
banning coverage
of any in vitro fertilization
services. That
means that for an estimated
1,800 veterans
like Jason, they will also have
to spend tens
of thousands of dollars to get
pregnant and
start a family.
Senator Patty Murray wants that
to change.
This Democrat from Washington
state sits on
the Senate Veterans Affairs
Committee, and
she wrote a bill that would lift
the VA's
IVF ban. But for six years, her
efforts have
been blocked.
SEN. PATTY MURRAY (D),
Washington: To me,
when someone goes off to fight a
war for us,
a man or a woman, we have an
obligation as
the country to make them whole
again, as whole
as we can. And, certainly,
having a family,
having children, having that
kind of quality
of life that a lot of Americans
want is something
that we should make sure they
get.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why is it that
the VA doesn't
pay for these services now?
SEN. PATTY MURRAY: I have been
told that it
is because of the cost. I
believe that that
shouldn't be an issue. This is
something that
is a cost of war and that, as
Americans, we
should do what we can for the
people who served
our country. So, the stated
reason is money,
but I'm skeptical.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What do you
think the issue
it really is?
SEN. PATTY MURRAY: It is hard to
get anyone
to say anything past cost. I
would say to
them, let's get over the cost.
If there's
another issue, tell us what it
is.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, what is
the cost? One
estimate says covering IVF and
other fertility
treatments for veterans for five
years would
be $578 million. Some IVF
advocates say that
estimate is inflated.
We reached out to the two
Republicans who
run the Veterans Affairs
Committees in the
House and the Senate. Neither
would speak
with us. Republican Congressman
Jeff Miller
from Florida, chairman of the
House VA Committee,
gave us a statement saying he
was trying to
balance the needs of veterans
with the concerns
over IVF.
Several sources told the
"NewsHour" that these
concerns over IVF apparently
come from pro-life
organizations who object to the
treatments.
These groups argue that, because
some of the
embryos created or stored during
IVF sometimes
get destroyed, IVF is then
similar to abortion.
We reached out to the main
pro-life groups
to talk about their concerns,
but they all
declined our requests.
SEN. PATTY MURRAY: What I would
answer to
that is that this is a decision
each one of
these men and woman have to make
on their
own. And if they decide this is
the way that
they can have a family and
become whole again,
that decision should be up to
them.
But our country shouldn't be
deciding for
one philosophy, if it's a
religious philosophy,
a ban on all Americans who
served our country
in having the ability to have a
child.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It appears
unlikely Congress
will change the VA's policy
before the next
election. But for young veterans
and their
families who struggle to afford
IVF, time
is very short.
DR. GILBERT MOTTLA, Shady Grove
Fertility:
We're really talking about some
1,800 Iraq
and Afghanistan veterans who are
now aging.
This one group of war injured,
we really need
to move this legislation forward
and get these
individuals the coverage they
need before
they lose their own reproductive
potential.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Doctor Gilbert
Mottla is
a fertility doctor in Maryland
who works with
military families. He's pushing
the VA to
change its policy, which he says
is driven
in part by misconceptions about
IVF, like
the concern that IVF causes
multiple pregnancies
at once, leading to selective
abortions.
DR. GILBERT MOTTLA: I think it
really is a
misunderstanding of what the
procedure is
about. And it generates -- goes
back to the
early '90s, when in vitro was
very, very new.
This is a 34-year-old procedure
now that has
come of age tactically.
And back in the early '90s, when
Congress
was looking at this, it was a
new procedure,
not very successful, fraught
with some problems
of multiple pregnancy, which
really are over
in many ways.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There's no
sign Jason Hallett
is at all frustrated with the
injuries he's
suffered and what they have done
to his life,
but the same isn't true for the
way he feels
about Congress.
What do you think about the
people who have
been holding this piece of
legislation up?
CPL. JASON HALLETT: It's very
angering. And
it brings a lot of resentment
towards my active
service and stuff. I don't
regret joining
the Marine Corps. But the simple
fact is that
they told us that we'd be taken
care of us
if we got injured.
And I guarantee that, if it was
a congressman's
kid or them themselves that
wanted IVF, and
they had to go through the same
process and
the same hoops, that they would
be doing everything
they can to make it happen.
RACHEL HALLETT: It's hard to
know that he
would protect them and he would
give up all
of this for them, and they will
not take just
a little bit of time to try to
fix this issue
that we are having.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rachel is
undergoing the
first steps of her fertility
treatment. If
all goes well, she could be
pregnant as early
as February. If it doesn't, they
will probably
need loans for any additional
treatment.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Windsor, Colorado.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the most
prestigious
international literary awards is
the annual
Man Booker Prize.
Marlon James, a professor of
English at Macalester
College in Minnesota, is the
first Jamaican
writer to win for his novel "A
Brief History
of Seven Killings."
Jeffrey Brown talked to him at
the Miami Book
Fair in November.
JEFFREY BROWN: This novel is set
in a Jamaica
you grew up in, right, in the
1970s, '80s?
A violent time.
MARLON JAMES, Author, "A Brief
History of
Seven Killings": Yes.
It was a violent time, but it
was also a time
of a huge explosion in Jamaican
culture. And,
funny enough, 1976 is in some
ways responsible
-- or the 1970s is in some way
responsible
for my writing career, because
the whole idea
of writing in the voice of the
people, writing
in the voice that comes out of
my own mouth
is a reggae concept. And it's
something that
also came out of the 70s, which
is not to
turn a blind eye. It was a
horrible time a
lot of the time.
JEFFREY BROWN: But pick up on
that. Reggae
influenced so many people in
terms of music,
but it influenced your ear, the
voice?
MARLON JAMES: Yes, not just --
there's quite
a few Caribbean writers, the
poets first,
certainly, but the idea that you
-- the voice
of -- the voice that was in your
mouth, which
has always been called broken
English, as
if it needs to be fixed, could
be used to
tell very complicated things,
stories that
have no resolution, characters
that you can't
just dismiss or outright
condemn, not falling
into this kind of Stepin Fetchit
kind of comedy.
It was something that reggae
did. And that
was also something that came out
of the '70s.
It's sort of taking cultural
ownership of
your own voice.
JEFFREY BROWN: The plot revolves
around an
attempted assassination of Bob
Marley, but
it's not a fictional biography
of Marley.
MARLON JAMES: No.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's just in the
background.
You didn't want to do that. You
wanted to
set it with him in the center,
but then everything
else.
MARLON JAMES: Him in the center,
but spinning
-- but the story is really about
what's going
on around him.
JEFFREY BROWN: You like that
sense of being
in history, but not right in the
history that
we read in the history books?
Yes.
MARLON JAMES: Yes, and it's been
something
that has been a concern of mine
from my first
novel, this sort of interior
history of Jamaica,
because it starts off being
about a bunch
of men and women in the whole
periphery of
Marley, but then it goes on to
talk about
the Cold War and how the '70s
created the
'80s, and then how we're still
reeling from
that and making sense of that.
JEFFREY BROWN: You talked about
writing for
a sense of sight, for a sense of
smell, that
kind of sensory perception that
comes -- you
feel that in your writing?
MARLON JAMES: Yes.
I feel that it's something that
I teach and
something that I have been very
sort of deliberate
about, because I think we overly
on sight,
and there's more to it than
that. A writer
who is really good at invoking
all the details
is Sebastian Junger. And he will
sometimes
nail all five senses in the
first 50 words.
I don't even know if he is doing
it consciously.
So, when...
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. But you're
doing it consciously.
MARLON JAMES: I do it
consciously, because
I do -- I am a very -- it's
funny, because
I'm actually a very -- I'm not a
mechanical
writer, but I'm a mechanical
writing teacher.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes?
MARLON JAMES: And you know when
people say,
I felt like I was there?
What they are saying is, you
unlocked all
five senses. And I think, for
example, smell
carries memories, smell carries
nostalgia.
When was the last time a book
made you taste
something? And I think this is
really, really
important for this sort of
immersive feel,
especially, in my case, where I
am taking
them into really negative
territory and really
dark areas.
JEFFREY BROWN: So it's not just
paint a portrait
that I can see. It's put me in
there.
MARLON JAMES: It's putting you
in there.
If you're going to have food,
cook it or at
least let me -- to smell it.
What does the
paint smell like? I was speaking
to the Royal
Society for the Blind in
England. And they
were giving me a special sort of
recognition
for the book, because it focuses
on all other
senses.
Someone who is visually impaired
can still
get a full sense of the novel,
as opposed
to so much of it being locked
out from them
because we're writing so much on
sight. A
person who has been blind all
his life has
no idea what red means.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. So how do
you write red,
right?
MARLON JAMES: That's a question
I ask my class.
Tell somebody who has been blind
all their
life what red is. What is --
describe red.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. So do you
know the impact
of winning the Booker?
MARLON JAMES: Man, I have no
idea.
It's nice seeing it on the
bestseller list.
I'm not complaining.
(LAUGHTER)
MARLON JAMES: I really hope it
makes people
more curious about Caribbean
lit, and beyond
Caribbean lit.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Which is very
rich in a way
that we don't know.
MARLON JAMES: It is very rich.
And even when we talk about rich
Caribbean
lit, we tend to talk just about
English-speaking.
Cuban lit has never needed
anybody's help.
There's great literature coming
out of Puerto
Rico. There's always been great
literature
coming out of Haiti, Suriname.
The Dutch Caribbean
also writes, and, also, some
great new novelists
coming out of Barbados and
Jamaica.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, "A
Brief History
of Seven Killings."
Marlon James, thank you. And,
again, congratulations.
MARLON JAMES: Thanks for having
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A news update
before we go.
Late this evening, the White
House released
some details of the president's
executive
actions on guns. He will call
for background
checks on online sales and gun
shows, have
the FBI hire 230 new people to
process those
checks, and ask Congress for a
$500 million
investment in mental health. Mr.
Obama will
make the formal announcement
tomorrow.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.